Adding feedback to improve the messaging and illustration of What is JSON Schema (#724)
json-schema-org/website: pages/overview/what-is-jsonschema.md

section: docs
title: What is JSON Schema?
---

> JSON Schema is a declarative language for annotating and validating JSON instances' structure, constraints, and data types. It provides a way to standardize and define expectations for JSON data.

Reviewer: This is a key statement which it would be good to make sure the TSC sees and agrees on.

Reviewer 2: I think "instances" is terminology precisely 0% of people understand who haven't read it somewhere in our docs (who seem likely to be 0% of people reading this page).

The consequence of that I think is:

* that word should be immediately interlinked to the glossary the first time it's used

but also

* I would personally not use it in the first sentence certainly. I'd use "JSON data".

Reviewer 3: "define expectations for JSON data" is also confusing - data does not have expectations. People (developers) have expectations.
Perhaps "It provides a standard way to define what JSON data is valid for applications".

Reviewer 4: "define people's expectations for JSON data"

Reviewer 3: I agree that terms should be defined on first use. A glossary link is less than ideal in an intro, but better than nothing. The point is, I think these pages should use terms _consistently_ and avoid defining aliases which can raise questions (especially if those aliases are not defined in the glossary).
The glossary defines "instance" but not "document" (it probably should, and "JSON data" as well,
and perhaps distinguish between them all.)  I think many people think a "document" means streamable content in a file (or web resource), as opposed to in-memory data (i.e. file.json vs. a parsed JSON value in a data structure in a programming language), which is why I suggest not using "document" here. "JSON data" is better but it does add an alias for "instance"...

Reviewer 4: I also agree with Julian that "instances" might be a bit vernacular-y at this point.

```suggestion
> JSON Schema is a declarative language for defining structure, constraints, and data types for JSON data.
```

Reviewer 5: > structure, constraints, and data types

I feel like these words are all saying the same thing and using all of them is confusing. I'd just use "constraints" because JSON Schema isn't really about structure or data types. Those things are just a consequence of the constraints of the schema.

<br/>

## How does JSON Schema work?

When it comes to data exchange, JSON Schema stands out as a powerful standard for defining the structure and rules of JSON data. It uses a set of [keywords](https://json-schema.org/learn/glossary#keyword) to define the properties of your data.

While JSON Schema provides the language, validating a JSON [instance](https://json-schema.org/learn/glossary#instance) against a [schema](https://json-schema.org/learn/glossary#schema) requires a JSON Schema [validator](https://json-schema.org/implementations#validators). The JSON validator checks if the JSON documents conform to the schema.

> JSON validators consist of both open-source and commercial tools that implement the JSON Schema specification. Such tooling enables easy integration of JSON Schema into projects of any size.

Reviewer 2: I don't personally know what the reason to stress that validators can be either open or closed source here. It's a thing true of any software. But the diff here makes it seem like you need *both* kinds simultaneously to me I think.

I'd delete the sentence entirely TBH, but alternatively "There are both open-source as well as closed-source tools which implement the specification" or something.

Author: Thanks. I'll remove entirely the distinction of open - comercial validators.

![How JSON Schema works](/img/json_schema.svg)

## Benefits of JSON Schema for Developers

JSON Schema empowers developers in the following ways:

> * **Structured Data Description**: JSON Schema empower developers to use JSON to describe the structure, constraints, and data types of existing JSON data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Structured Data Description**: JSON Schema empowers developers to use JSON to describe the structure, constraints, and data types of existing JSON data.
```

> * **Structured Data Description**: JSON Schema empower developers to use JSON to describe the structure, constraints, and data types of existing JSON data.

Reviewer: Not everyone uses JSON to define their JSON Schema. Some use YAML, others use functional libraries with currying to construct the schema. I don't think adding "use JSON to" makes sense here.

Author: Thanks for the clarification Ben!

* **Facilitating Seamless Data Exchange:**: JSON Schema establishes a common language for data exchange, no matter the complexity of your project. It defines precise validation rules for your data structures to create a shared understanding and increase interoperability across different systems and platforms.
* **Enhancing Data Documentation**: JSON Schema enables the creation of clear and standardized representations of data. This improves understanding and collaboration among developers, stakeholders, and collaborators, enhancing organizational efficiency.
* **Access to a Vibrant Tooling Ecosystem**: JSON Schema is supported by a diverse array of languages, libraries, and frameworks with community-driven [tools](https://json-schema.org/tools). This vibrant ecosystem enhances development productivity and provides resources for effective schema implementation and utilization.

## History of JSON Schema 

JSON Schema dates back to the [first JSON Schema proposal](https://web.archive.org/web/20071026185150/http://json.com/json-schema-proposal/) submitted by Kris Zyp to [json.com](http://json.com) on October 2nd, 2007.

> The newest version of JSON Schema is [2020-12](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/release-notes), which represents the latest advancements and has expanded capabilities compared with the previous versions, `draft-04`, `draft-06`, and `draft-07`.

Reviewer 2: Some way of ensuring this sentence stays up to date (via CI) seems like a nice issue to file. Alternatively having a `https://json-schema.org/latest/release-notes` link might be nice, though because we have plain markdown here that wouldn't fix the "problem" that the text will still say "2020-12"...

Author: Great idea. I'll add that redirect and modify the link accordingly.
